---
title: "Moving Away from Non-Free Software"
date: 2021-05-23T00:00:00+00:00
updated: 2023-07-08T00:00:00+00:00
draft: false
description: "The reality of switching to FOSS and a list of apps to help you with it."
---

Smartphones are a crucial part of the modern-day. Chances are, you're reading
this from your smartphone. We use it from making calls and texting people to
making payments, sharing personal data like pictures, etc. In an ideal world,
we would own the data that we share with others. Unfortunately, we aren't
living in that perfect world. The recent WhatsApp controversy is a prime
example of why we shouldn't trust non-free services with our data. While more
and more people are switching to Signal and other free messaging apps, many of
us don't realize that we still use non-free software for most of our day-to-day
tasks.

Our devices come pre-installed with apps for all essential tasks such as a
Dialer, SMS Messenger, Camera, Chrome, etc. These pre-installed apps are always
non-free closed source software, just like WhatsApp. These apps are continually
tracking what we do and share the data with companies such as Google. They then
sell it to advertising companies for their profit. It's time we took control of
our data by switching to free software.

## "Free" and "Non-Free" Software?

The word free in the context of software implies "freedom" (free as in freedom,
not free of cost). Free and open-source software (FOSS) or free software gives
the user freedom to access, study, modify and share. The software that does not
provide these freedoms to users is called proprietary (closed source) software.
Most services we take for granted, such as WhatsApp, Instagram, YouTube, are
all proprietary software that is also free to use. These are also called
freeware.

Open-source software is almost always free software, but there are some
[exceptions](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/open-source-misses-the-point.en.html).
Software that's both free and open source are called FOSS - Free and Open
Source Software. The apps that I'll be talking about are all FOSS.

## Platforms and Clients

After the recent WhatsApp scandal, people started exploring other alternatives
such as Signal, Telegram, etc. To all of you who have switched away and
uninstalled WhatsApp, kudos to you. Some of us might have changed to other
platforms but are forced to use WhatsApp for work-related purposes or keep in
touch with friends. While we may not be able to quit it altogether, we can
still minimize how much data is being collected.

Let's take Instagram as an example. Instagram is a platform. We use the
Instagram app to access said platform to view and post content, all of which is
hosted on the forum. The app is a client to access the platform. Say you have
two phones, one running Android and one running iOS. These two phones are
running an entirely different operating system. Yet, if you switch your SIM
cards between them, you can still take calls and messages sent to that SIM. In
this case, the phone acts as a client, and your SIM provider is the platform.

Most of the tracking that takes place is from the app itself. By switching to
FOSS clients for such platforms, we can enhance our privacy a lot and still
access the same media. You can view all the content that your friends post on
the forum, post content, send and receive messages, etc., from a different
client. Like using two apps to manage SMS, for example. More often than not,
you get the added benefit of additional features that aren't available in the
official clients.

Using privacy-invasive platforms is the issue in the first place. While
switching to FOSS clients may minimize data collection, this isn't the proper
solution. All the content that we post on the invasive platform will still be
tracked. Switching to alternative _platforms_ is the only way to indeed be
free. This article is for those who're forced to use the Big Brother platforms,
for which FOSS clients are but a short term solution.

## App Store

Let's start with the App Store itself. We use Play Store to install, update and
manage all our apps. There's an alternative called [Aurora
Store](https://auroraoss.com/download/), which is a FOSS (Free and Open Source)
client for the Play Store service. You can do everything you do on Play Store
with Aurora Store. There are also other app stores than Google's Play Store,
such as F-Droid. F-Droid is a repository of FOSS applications only. You can
access this store by using their [official client](https://f-droid.org/) or by
[Aurora Droid](https://auroraoss.com/download/). All the apps listed in this
article will be available via F-Droid.

## Basic Functionality

Simple Mobile Tools is a set of open-source Android apps that can replace most
of the pre-installed apps mentioned earlier. Here's a full list of apps that
they offer:

- App Launcher
- Calculator
- Calendar
- Camera
- Clock
- Contacts
- Dialer
- Draw (sketching app)
- File Manager
- Flashlight
- Gallery
- Music Player
- Notes
- SMS Messenger

These apps don't require any additional permissions, they have customizable
widgets, and theme options are linked across their apps. Switching to Simple
apps will be a significant step in moving away from non-free software.

## Web Browser

Browsers are a crucial part of our digital life. Chrome is the browser that
comes pre-installed on all Android devices, and it's notorious for being a
privacy nightmare. Chrome itself is proprietary, but it's based on an
open-source browser project called Chromium.

[Firefox](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/mobile) is a browser that's
developed by a non-profit organization called Mozilla Foundation. Aside from
being open source, it has a plethora of features and additional extensions that
you can install.

[Bromite](https://www.bromite.org) is a browser that's based on Chromium with
inbuilt ad blockers and privacy hardening. It looks and functions exactly like
Chrome with the added benefits of an ad-free web experience and no browser
level tracking.

## Social Media

[Frost for Facebook](https://github.com/AllanWang/Frost-for-Facebook) is a
wrapper for _Facebook_. It's much lighter than the bloated official client and
has many additional features compared to it.

(**Update:** Barinsta has been banned. Use Instagram's web version instead.)
[Barinsta](https://github.com/austinhuang0131/barinsta) is an open-source
_Instagram_ client that offers a decluttered experience compared to the
increasingly cluttered app. It has almost all the features that the official
app has and a few extra features such as downloading posts or an entire
profile, customizing your feeds' layout, viewing stories and DMs without
letting the other person know that you've read them, etc. The only caveat is
that you can't post or upload stories. Still, the developer has stated that
he's actively working on implementing this.

_Twitter_ has taken it upon itself to hinder third-party developers by limiting
their APIs a lot in an attempt to force users to use their official client.
Despite this, [Fritter](https://github.com/jonjomckay/fritter) manages to
provide a feature-rich Twitter experience.

I would also like to mention a few alternative platforms for the above
mentioned social media. [Mastodon](https://joinmastodon.org) is an up and
coming decentralized platform that's similar to Facebook and Twitter but much
better. [Pixelfed](https://pixelfed.org/) is an image sharing platform similar
to Instagram.

#### A Note on PWAs

All the above mentioned social media sites have a Progressive Web App (PWA),
which you can install by accessing the social media's website through your
browser. Your browser should show a pop-up asking whether you want to add it to
your home screen. You can also click on the 3-dot menu, and select add to the
home screen. This'll install the Progressive Web App on your device, which
doesn't take up any space at all.

## Entertainment

One of the most significant selling points of smartphones is getting our daily
dose of entertainment anywhere. We consume a lot of content in apps such as
Instagram, Facebook, YouTube, etc. While the services themselves are closed
source, you can still maintain privacy by using open source clients for these
services.

[NewPipe](https://newpipe.net) is a lightweight client for _YouTube_, and
despite being lightweight, it's feature-packed. It can do everything that the
official YouTube app can do and much more. You can download videos to your
storage, set the default video quality, play videos in picture-in-picture or
the background, play only audio, which essentially makes YouTube a music
streaming service, and much more. To top it all off, it blocks all ads on
YouTube so you can enjoy your favorite content without interruption.

(**Update:** Reddit has paywalled their APIs, leading to almost third party
apps getting killed. Infinity will be switching to a paid model in the future.)
[Infinity for Reddit](https://github.com/Docile-Alligator/Infinity-For-Reddit)
is a beautifully designed _Reddit_ client that's very minimal. As with most
apps in this list, it blocks ads. It has a neat feature called Lazy Mode, which
scrolls through posts automatically for you.

## Media Player

[VLC Media Player](https://www.videolan.org/index.html) is a cross-platform
media player software that supports a wide range of codecs. It can handle files
in your storage in addition to streaming media directly from the internet.
There are quite a few features that come in handy such as the
picture-in-picture mode, which plays the media in a pop-up window, enabling you
to use other apps simultaneously.

## Email Client

[FairEmail](https://email.faircode.eu) is a FOSS email client that can manage
your Gmail, Yahoo Mail, Outlook, and just about every email provider. All your
email accounts can be managed from a single app, as you can add unlimited
accounts in one unified inbox, making your email experience not only private
but also productive.

## Closing Thoughts

As each year passes, we're getting closer and closer to an Orwellian era.
Countries like China already have nation-wide deep surveillance systems. They
impose the [Social Credit
System](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_Credit_System), which monitors
every move of citizens both online and offline. They use this to judge people
when they apply for jobs, loans, and even necessities. All of this is made
possible by data collection. By avoiding non-free software and services as much
as possible, we can safeguard our data from prying eyes and Big Brothers.

> Arguing that you don't care about the right to privacy because you have
> nothing to hide is no different than saying you don't care about free speech
> because you have nothing to say.

\- Edward Snowden
